>> As scientists announced the
completion of the human genome
map, the emerging science
of epigenetics provides
an alternate view on how we
can gain mastery over our genes
and achieve true well-being.
>> I am the master of my
genome because I can change
my thought, my perceptions,
and in the process,
I can change my
genetic activity.
>> This is Gaia News.
Dr. Bruce Lipton is a
cellular biologist and leader
in the field of
epigenetics, which
holds that external factors
can affect our gene expression.
Lipton's research
over many decades
has suggested that
it's our environment
and even more importantly,
how we perceive it
that determines how
our genes behave.
>> Less than 1% of disease
is connected to genes.
Over 90% of illnesses
stress, which means
you're not living in harmony
with the environment.
And the function of the cells
is to adjust their biology
to the environment.
But I say, but
wait, the brain is
the interface between the
environment and the genes.
So my cells don't know what
the real environment is.
My cells only respond to my
perception of the environment.
While positive
thoughts can heal you
of any disease, that's
placebo, negative thinking
can cause any disease
irregardless of what genes
you have because negative
thinking through epigenetics
can rewrite healthy genes
and turn them into cancer.
Creating the good,
but you also have
to recognize you're
participating in creating
the negative things as well.
>> The biggest roadblock to
exerting a positive influence
over our genes, Dr. Lipton says,
comes from faulty programming.
>> All of us got programmed the
first seven years of our life.
We play the program
95% of the day.
The conscious mind,
which is the creator mind
is separate from the
subconscious mind,
which is the program mind.
The significance is that
subconscious is autopilot,
95% of your life is
coming from a subconscious
then you were playing programs
and you're not playing creator.
And the issue is, the programs
we got in for seven years,
and up to 60% of
those programs are
beliefs or things that
are dis-empowering,
self-sabotaging,
limiting behaviors.
And therefore we're losing
power in the program that says,
who do you think you are?
You don't deserve that?
You're not that smart.
These are things that we
acquire when we were young.
>> So how do we get
beyond this programming?
>> We have to replace the
programs that operate 95%
of the day, those programs that
are not supportive of who you
are because that
means 95% of the day,
you're playing those programs
and you don't see it.
But everybody else does.
And the behavior that's
coming out is not yours.
It's the one you downloaded.
But if you rewrote
those programs,
then the direction of your
life radically changes.
You can create what you want.
>> Dr. Lipton suggests several
specific ways you can rewrite
the programs of your
subconscious mind.
>> The first way is how did I
get the program in the first
place?
A child in his
first seven years is
in a state of the
theta, which is
by definition hypnosis,
which is how it downloads
the behavior by simply observing
mother, father, siblings,
community, just watching them.
How can you change it?
I go, through hypnosis!
Oh, do I have to see
a hypnotherapist?
I say, nope.
The moment you fall
asleep, alpha disconnects
and now you're in the next
lower vibration called theta.
Every night when
you go to bed, you
put a pair of earphones on, you
play a program of what you want
to be true in your life, health
program, relationship program,
job program, whatever it that
is the kind of belief you
want to operate from.
First coming through
the earphones,
it's now going straight
into the subconscious mind.
>> According to Dr. Lipton,
other ways of accessing
the subconscious and rewriting
its programs include repeating
positive affirmations and
practicing various energy
psychology modalities.
For Dr. Lipton, it's never
been more important to do so.
>> There are two things that I
recognize that are fundamental
to the evolution as planet.
Number one is the one we just
talked about, epigenetics,
because that takes victim
away from me to say, no,
I am master of this
biology and what it does.
And number two, you are an
internal spirit energy field
that plays through this body.
Not only can I not die,
but I can create the world
that I want.
And all of a sudden,
victimization
falls right out the window.
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.